I believe that we can both unravel the
mysteries of the universe and save human
lives at the same time through
interdisciplinary research and I'm going
to share with you today just one story
my story that has crossed these paths
and we start in the supernova remnant
Cassiopeia A it's one of the youngest
ones in our galaxy about 330 years old
and the Astronomy colleague approached
me one day and she had over eight years
of magnificent data she was trying to
understand the 3d structure this nebula
the supernova remnant but she had no way
to look at it so I looked with at the
data with her and said I think I can
help you and although this and this is
all real data you're seeing on the
screen above me
this is the Hollywood rendering version
but the rough draft I made with her look
something more like this
and she was able to make novel
discoveries about how supernovas explode
and how the shells explode within it
using a piece of software developed at
Brigham and Women's Hospital here in
Boston called 3d slicer and it was
originally developed for looking at
patient's brain scans doing surgical
planning and doing 3d renderings of
anatomy who knew our solution was
lurking just across the river now people
don't believe me when I tell them that
astronomy and medical imaging these two
seemingly different fields are really
similar so we're going to play a little
game I like to call which is which and
I'll play this with new doctors and
strummers I work with I'm gonna show you
two images on the screen one of them is
biomechanical and one of them is
astronomical and you have to take them
correctly in your head so here's the
first set and again one of these are the
biomechanical and one is astronomical
I'll give you a second to make your
little vote mentally so it turns out the
one on the left is some of the raw data
of the supernova remnant we were just
looking at and on the right we have an
angiogram of a patient's heart and
coronary arteries okay we're going to
try another one
now this one is much closer to my daily
bread and butter
now tell me which is which and one of
these is literally millimeters across
and the other is billions of miles so it
turns out the one on the left is a
control microscopy image of human cornea
and on the right we have a radio
telescope image of the star forming
region NGC 1333 now aside from the fact
that these images look similar and
doctors trying to find like a tumor in a
patient's brain or a young star forming
is similar the way the day that comes
from the machine or the telescope is
remarkably similar so here's a MRI
scanner and if you've never seen a raw
data of a patient's brain this is what
it looks like and when the MRI scanner
is acquiring the data it goes in slices
so you can see the patient's nose their
eyes that kind of progresses towards the
middle of the head you can start to see
the cortex and it steps through to the
back of the brain now believe it or not
telescopes and particularly radio
telescopes operate in a similar manner
and if we were a look at the raw data
from these telescopes we're going to
look at a nebula called m16 and we start
with this radio telescope at the front
of nebula is stepping back towards the
middle as a nebula just like the middle
of the patient's brain and those bright
regions are where young stars are
forming all the way to the back of the
nebula just like the back of the
patient's head now although the doctors
are able to then take this data and look
at in 3d and do surgical planning this
is just this is like cutting-edge just
about as you get with any astronomer and
this is what they have to look at to
understand the three-dimensional
structure and velocities momentum in our
universe but we can do better so you
might recognize this nebula more like
this the famous Hubble image of the
pillars of creation or the Eagle Nebula
and I'm going to fade this out onto a
radio image it's a false color in the
background and fade away the Hubble
image you're used to but we don't need
to just look at this in 3d we can look
at it in 2d and here I'm using a
radiology toolkit called osirix I show
that this drama mark pound whose data
this is he was a
because he had been trying so hard to
study the impact of a young group of
stars he had a theory that there's this
wind crashing and tossing the pillow
pillars over and it took a month to
prove this with conventional
visualization but in one shot you can
see the shock wave of wind blasting
through across to the left-hand side of
the screen now I don't think myself or a
my collaborators would anticipated how
far this is gone and by sharing the
medical technology of astronomy in
astronomy with medical we have been able
to find new stars and supernova remnants
and revolutionize how you do heart
Diagnostics and look at data for
different patients and organize it and
data-mine it now I don't have time to
show you all these great projects I'll
show you one of them and this is a
collaboration I've been working on
called the multi scale hemodynamics
project in working with doctors at
Brigham and Women's Hospital
now what this represents is a novel way
of doing heart disease diagnostics and
then that is a conventional invasive
angiography this is just a CT scan and
what you see here are the coronary
arteries so if you have your heart in
the arteries wrap around the outside
these are the arteries you worry about
getting blocked in giving you a heart
attack and killing you so it's really
important that we look at them now this
is a CT scan of a patient with a blood
flow simulation that's the coloring up
there that simulation was originally
developed for studying the structure of
DNA and then the visualization was done
with a tool kit called visit originally
developed for physics simulations in
their disciplinary yeah my assignment
was to try and come up with a new way of
looking at this to make it optimal for
the doctors in the hospital how can we
make it the most efficient for them for
a diagnosis and I came up with this
image it's 2d white as I took the whole
artery and collapsed everything into a
2d plane yeah I got some very quizzical
looks when I showed this to the doctors
originally but I was inspired to do this
representation for my astronomy work
where we've been using these tree
diagrams we call them along the bottom
to understand the structure of nebula
well we were inspired in that work from
the bioinformatics and genome community
where they use these tree diagrams that
understand their gene expression
they were inspired by the evolutionary
biologist who used these tree diagrams
to understand how species evolved now
related the first of which was drawn by
Sir Charles Darwin and here's an example
from his origin of the species so
straight from Darwin through biology
physics astronomy back to medical
imaging interdisciplinary I may say well
is this 2d representation better why the
study at Harvard Medical School to
answer just that question and it turns
out if you present the image on the left
to a doctor on the average they find
about 39% of the high-risk regions that
could explode or block your heart
killing on the right we can do a little
better and they're able to find 62% of
these high-risk dangerous regions but we
can do even better simply by changing
the colors so the rainbow color map is a
sin most doctors and astronomers and
physicists are guilty of using and it
doesn't focus the best qualities of your
visual system human system can see
brightness variation contrast not really
good at that whole green yellow blue
thing but now if you look at in these
shades of red and highlight the regions
our most diseased with dark red now
doctor can find 91 percent of the
high-risk region simply by changing
their colors
and I was never know and the importance
of color if it was not for my computer
science and visualization collaborators
showing this to me
so again interdisciplinary collaboration
now how you even get a collaboration
like this in the case of astronomical
medicine it started with a Harvard
astronomy professor Alyssa Goodman
serendipitously meeting a computer
science as an imaging specialist from
Brigham and Women's Hospital and their
recruitment of a very adventurous
open-minded young students and from
there it has exploded and we pulled in
cardiologists and computer scientists
and radiologists and astronomers
physicists chemists computational
physicists I mean we brought so many
people together and has been
enlightening to share domains and
information across borders and we're
still going and although most of the
people up on the screen are from Harvard
Harvard med now we cross different
institutions and continents to work
together and all I can say is is just
been wonderful we're continuing to make
new discoveries and I just urge you
attend conferences not in your own
domain read books and journals not in
your own discipline watch TED Talks and
come to events like this and say hi the
neighbor sitting next to you because you
really never know where your next great
idea is going to come